---
title: Sphinx Breathe
---

## Sphinx Breathe
* [GitHub - michaeljones/breathe: ReStructuredText and Sphinx bridge to Doxygen](https://github.com/michaeljones/breathe)

```
pip install breathe
```

* documentation root path:
    * `/home/me/docproj/`
* breathe path:
    * `/home/me/docproj/ext/breathe/`
* doxygen xml output:
    * `/home/me/docproj/doxyxml/`

`conf.py`を以下のように修正する。
breathe pathを追加
extensionとしてbreatheを指定
defualt projectを追加

```python
import os
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath('.'))
path_to_breathe = '/usr/local/lib/python3.6/site-packages/breathe/'
path_to_this_dir = os.path.abspath(os.path.dirname(__file__))
path_to_xml = os.path.join(path_to_this_dir, "../xml")
sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath(path_to_breathe))

# breatheにprojectの情報を伝える
breathe_default_project = "docker-sphinx-quickstart"
breathe_projects = {
    "docker-sphinx-quickstart": os.path.abspath(path_to_xml)
}
sys.path.append( "/home/me/docproj/ext/breathe/" )

extensions = ['sphinx.ext.pngmath', 'sphinx.ext.todo', 'breathe' ]
```

doxygenのbuildを自動で行いときは、sourceファイルの場所をbraetheに知らせる必要がある。
以下のディレクトリ構成のとき

```
/some/long/path/to/myproject/file.c
/some/long/path/to/myproject/subfolder/otherfile.c
```

以下のように設定する。

```python
breathe_projects_source = {
   "myprojectsource" :
       ( "/some/long/path/to/myproject", [ "file.c", "subfolder/otherfile.c" ] )
   }
```

### Directive
* [Directives & Config Variables — Breathe 'latest' documentation](http://breathe.readthedocs.io/en/latest/directives.html)

* [doxygenclass Directive — Breathe 'latest' documentation](https://breathe.readthedocs.io/en/latest/class.html#class-example)

Commonly Available options in directives

* `project`
    * Specifies which project, as defined in the breathe_projects config value, should be used for this directive. This overrides the default project if one has been specified.
    * This is not used by the autodoxygenindex directive. Use source instead to specify the entry in the breathe_projects_source config value to use.
* `path`
    * Directly specifies the path to the folder with the doxygen output. This overrides the project and default project if they have been specified.
    * This is not used by the autodoxygenindex directive. Use source-path instead to specify the root path to the sources files which are to be processed.
* `no-link`
    * Instructs Breathe to not attempt to generate any document targets for the content generated by this particular directive.
    * This allows you to have your main reference listings somewhere with targets, but then to be able to sneak in repeat directives into other parts of the documentation to illustrate particular points without Sphinx getting confused what should be linked to by other references.
* `outline`
    * Results in Breathe only outputting the raw code definitions without any additional description information.


## Configuration
[Directives & Config Variables — Breathe 'latest' documentation](https://breathe.readthedocs.io/en/latest/directives.html#id21)

Available options in `conf.py`



## Reference
