---
title: Chapter01-07. Large Categories
book_title: Categories for the working mathematician
book_chapter: 01
book_section: 07
---

## 01-07. Large Categories

#### Definition Toph
- $X, Y, Z, \ldots,$
    - topolotical spaces
- $\alpha: X \rightarrow Y$, $\beta: Y \rightarrow Z$,
    - arrow
    - homotopy class of $X \rightarrow Y$,

$$
    \alpha
    :=
    \{
        f: X \rightarrow Y
        \mid
        f \simeq g
    \},
    \
    \beta
    :=
    \{
        f: Y \rightarrow Z
        \mid
        f \simeq h
    \},
$$

where

$$
    f \simeq g
    \Leftrightarrow
    \exists F: X \times [0, 1] \rightarrow Y: \text{continuous map }
    \text{ s.t. }
    F(\cdot, 0) = f(\cdot),
    \
    F(\cdot, 1) = g(\cdot)
    .
$$

$$
    \beta \circ \alpha
    :=
    \{
        f: X \rightarrow Z
        \mid
        f \smieq h \circ g
    \}
    .
$$


<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Definitions Binary Relations category
- $X, Y, Z, \ldots$,
    - small sets
- $R: X \rightarrow Y$,
    - binary relations on $X \times Y$,
    - i.e. subset of $X \times Y$,
- $S: Y \rightarrow Z$,
    - binary relations on $Y \times Z$,
    - i.e. subset of $Y \times Z$,

The composition of the arrows are defined as

$$
    S \circ R
    :=
    \{
        \langle x, z \rangle
        \mid 
        y \in Y,
        \
        \langle x, y \rangle
        \in R,
        \
        \langle y, z \rangle
        \in S,
    \}
    .
$$

The identity arrow $X \rightarrow X$ is the identity relation on $X$.
Then $\mathbf{Rel}$ is all small sets as objects and binary relations on the small sets as arrows.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark
$\mathbf{Rel}$ contains $\mathbf{Set}$ as a subcategory.
Objects of $\mathbf{Set}$ are the same as $\mathbf{Rel}$.
Let $R: X \rightarrow Y \in \mathbf{Set}$.

$$
    \{
        \langle a, f(a) \rangle
        \mid
        a \in X
    \}
    \in \mathbf{Rel}
    .
$$

Collections of $\mathbf{Set}$ are subcollections of $\mathbf{Rel}$.
We have already know $\mathbf{Set}$ is a category, so $\mathbf{Set}$ is a sub category.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>


#### Definition Concrete category
- $C$,
    - category
- $U: C \rightarrow \mathbf{Set}$,
    - faithful functor

A pair $\langle C, U \rangle$ is said to be concrete category.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

A concrete category is 

#### Remark
Most of the categories in this section are concrete categoreis with forgetful functor $U$.
However, $\mathbf{Toph}$ and $\mathbf{Rel}$ is not be concrete categories with forgetful functor.

Indeed, an arrow of $\mathbf{Toph}$ is a homotopy class so a forgetful functor cannot be applied.
Also, a forgetful functor $U$ cannot be defined.
Indeed, let $$X := \{1\}, Y := \{1, 2\}$$ and

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    R
    & := &
        \{
            (1, 1),
            (1, 2),
        \}
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
    .
$$

$R$ is not a map from $X \rightarrow Y$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>


