---
title: Chapter01-01. Axioms for Categories
book_title: Categories for the working mathematician
book_chapter: 01
book_section: 01
---


## 01-01. Axioms for Categories

A metagraph consists of objects $a, b, c, \ldots,$ arrows $f,g,h, \ldots,$ and two operations

- Domain, which assigns to each arrow $f$ an object $a = \mathrm{dom}f$,
- CoDomain, which assigns to each arrow $f$ an object $b = \mathrm{dom}f$,

$$
    f: a \rightarrow b
$$

#### Definition metacategory
A metacategory is a metagraph with two additional operations.

- Identity, which assigns to each object $a$ an arrow $\mathrm{id}_{a} = 1_{a}: a \rightarrow a$,
- Composition, which assigns to each pair $\langle g, f \rangle$ of arrows with $\mathrm{dom}g = \mathrm{cod}f$,

$$
    g \circ f: a \rightarrow c
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Definition. Associativity
* $f:a \rightarrow b$,
* $g:b \rightarrow c$,
* $k:c \rightarrow d$,

$$
    k \circ (g \circ f)
    =
    (k \circ g) \circ f
    .
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Definition. Unit law
* for all arrows $f: a \rightarrow b$, $g: b \rightarrow c$,

$$
    1_{b} \circ f
    =
    f,
    \
    g \circ 1_{b}
    =
    g
    \label{equation_01_02}
    .
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Definition. Commutative
Diagram is said to be commutative if for each pair of vertices $c$ and $c^{\prime}$, any two compositions form $c$ to $c^{\prime}$ equals.

$$
    f_{1} \circ \cdots \circ f_{n}: c \rightarrow c^{\prime}
    =
    g_{1} \circ \cdots \circ g_{m}: c \rightarrow c^{\prime}
    .
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark
* $b$ is any object of metacategory $C$,

Then corresponding identity arrow $1_{b}$ is uniquely determinted by the properties $$\eqref{equation_01_02}$$.
Indeed,

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    1_{b}
    & = &
        1_{b} \circ 1_{b}^{\prime}
        \quad
        (\because g = 1_{b})
    \nonumber
    \\
    & = &
        1_{b}^{\prime}
        \quad
        (\because f = 1_{b}^{\prime})
    .
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For this reason, sometimes $1_{b}$ is written as $b: b \rightarrow b$.
Thus, $1_{b} = b = \mathrm{id}_{b}$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>


#### Example Metacategory of sets
* Objects are all sets,
* Arrows are all functions,
* Identity of objects $1_{S}: S \rightarrow S$ is usual identity
* compositoin of $f: X \rightarrow Y$, $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ is usual composite function: $(g \circ f) = g(fx)$ where $x \in X$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Metacategory of groups
* Objects are all groups,
* Arrows are all homomorphism,
* Identity of objects $1_{S}: S \rightarrow S$ is usual identity
* compositoin of $f: X \rightarrow Y$, $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ is usual composite function: $(g \circ f) = g(fx)$ where $x \in X$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Metacategory of topological spaces
* Objects are all topological spaces,
* Arrows are all continuous functions,
* Identity of objects $1_{S}: S \rightarrow S$ is usual identity
* compositoin of $f: X \rightarrow Y$, $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ is usual composite function: $(g \circ f) = g(fx)$ where $x \in X$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Metacategory of compact Hausdorff spaces
* Objects are all compact Hausdroff spaces
* Arrows are all continuous functions,
* Identity of objects $1_{S}: S \rightarrow S$ is usual identity
* compositoin of $f: X \rightarrow Y$, $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ is usual composite function: $(g \circ f) = g(fx)$ where $x \in X$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Metacategory of ringed spaces
* Objects are all ringed spaces 
* Arrows are all morphism,
* Identity of objects $1_{S}: S \rightarrow S$ is usual identity
* compositoin of $f: X \rightarrow Y$, $g: Y \rightarrow Z$ is usual composite function: $(g \circ f) = g(fx)$ where $x \in X$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark Metacategory of arrows
The objects of metacategory coresponds to identiy arrows.
The axioms can be defined in terms of arrows.

The arrows-only metacagory $C$ consists of 3 materials.

* (a-1) arrows
* (a-2) ordered pairs $\langle g, f \rangle$ called composable pairs of arrows
* (a-3) Operatoin assigning to each composable pair  $\langle g, f \rangle$ an arrow $g \circ f$
    * we say $g \circ f$ is defined for a composable pair $\langle f, g \rangle$.

Identity of allows-only metacategory $C$ is an arrow $u$ such that

- $f u = f$ whenever $f u$ is defined
- $u g = f$ whenever $u g$ is defined

Those materials need to satisfy the following axioms.

* (i) The composite $(k g) f$ is defined if and only if $k (g f)$ is defined. When either is defined, they're equal
* (ii) The composite $k g h$ is defined 
* (iii) For each arrow $g$ of $C$, there exist identity arrows $u$ and $u^{\prime}$ of $C$ such that $u^{\prime} g$ and $g u$ are defined.

Then the above arrows-only metacategory satisfies objects-and-arrows axioms, and vice versa.
Indeed,

$$

$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

## 01-02. Categories

A directed graph is a set $O$ of objects, a set $A$ of arrows, and two functoins: dom and cod.

$$
\begin{equation}
    \mathrm{dom}:A \rightarrow O,
    \
    \mathrm{cod}:A \rightarrow O,
    .
\end{equation}
$$

The set of composable pairs of arrows is the set

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    A \times_{O} A
    :=
    \{
        \langle g, f \rangle
        \mid
        g, f \in A,
        \
        \mathrm{dom}g
        =
        \mathrm{cod}f
    \},
\end{eqnarray}
$$

called the product over $O$.

A category is a (directed) graph with two additional functions: identity and composition.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
        \mathrm{id}: O
        & \xrightarrow{id} &
        1,
    \nonumber
    \\
        c
        & \mapsto &
        \mathrm{id}_{c},
    \nonumber
    \\
    A \times_{O} A
        & \xrightarrow{\circ} &
        1,
    \nonumber
    \\
    \langle g, f \rangle
        & \mapsto &
        g \circ f
    .
    \label{equation_01_02_01}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

For all object $a \in O$, all composable pairs of arrows $\langle g, f \rangle \in A \times_{O} A$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    \mathrm{dom}(\mathrm{id}a)
    & = &
        a
    \nonumber
    \\
    & = &
        \mathrm{cod}(\mathrm{id}a)
    \nonumber
    \\
    \mathrm{dom}(g \circ f)
    & = &
        \mathrm{dom}f
    \nonumber
    \\
    \mathrm{cod}(g \circ f)
    & = &
        \mathrm{cod}g
    .
    \label{equation_01_02_03}
\end{eqnarray}
$$

associativity and unit axioms holds.

We usually drop the letters $A$ and $O$.
$c$ is an object of $C$, we write

$$
    c \in C
    .
$$

$f$ is an arrow of $C$ and write

$$
    f \mathrm{in} C
    .
$$

For the set of arrows from $b$ to $c$, we write

$$
    \mathrm{hom}(b, c)
    =
    \{
        f \mid
        f \mathrm{in} \mathrm{C},
        \
        \mathrm{dom}f
        =
        b,
        \mathrm{cod}f
        =
        c
    \}
    .
$$


$\mathbf{0}$ is the empty category (no objects and no arrows).

$\mathbf{1}$ is the category with one object and one arrow.

$\mathbf{2}$ is the category with two objects $a, b$ and just one arrow $a \rightarrow b$ not the identity.

$\mathbf{3}$ is the category with three objects whose non-identity arrows are arranged as in the triangle.
Specifically, objects are $a, b, c$. Arrows are $$\mathrm{id}_{a}$$, $$\mathrm{id}_{b}$$, $$\mathrm{id}_{c}$$, $$f_{a, b}:a \rightarrow b$$,
$$f_{b, c}:b \rightarrow c$$, $$f_{a, c}:a \rightarrow c$$

$\rightrightarrows$ is the category with two objects $a, b$ and just two arrows $a \rightrightarrows b$ 

#### Definitoin Discrete Categories
A category is said to be discrete if every arrows is an identity.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark
Every set $X$ is the set of objects of a discrete category by adding identity $\mathrm{id}_{x}$ for all $x \in X$.

Discrete categories are sets.
Indeed, every discrete category is determined by its set of objects.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Definition Monoids
A monoids is a category with one object.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark
Monoid is a semigroup with identity element.
So each monoid is determinied by the set of all arrows, the identity arrow, and the rule for the compositoin of arrows.

Let $A$ be the set of all its arrows.
Since any two arrwos have a composite, a monoid is a set $M$ with a binar operation $M \times M \rightarrow M$ which is associative and has an identity.

- $C$: category
- $a \in C$: an object

$a$ and $\mathrm{Hom}(a, a)$ is a monoid.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>


#### Definition Group
A grouop is a category with one object in which every arrow has a (two-sided) inverse under composition.
That is,

$$
    f:a \rightarrow a \in C
    \Rightarrow
    \exists g: a \rightarrow a \mathrm{in} C
    \text{ s.t. }
    f \circ g = \mathrm{id}_{a},
    \
    g \circ f = \mathrm{id}_{a}.
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Matrices
- $K$: commutative ring
- $\textbf{Matr}_{K}$,
    - the set of all rectangular matrices with entries in $K$

$\textbf{Matr}_{K}$ is a category.
The objects are all positive integers $1, 2, \ldots, $ and each $m \times n$ matrix $f$ where $m, n$ are objects.
$f$ is an arrow $f: m \rightarrow n$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Sets
- $V$: an set of sets
- $\textbf{Ens}_{V}$,

$\textbf{Matr}_{K}$ is a category.
The objects are all sets $X \in V$.
Arrrows are all functions $f: X \rightarrow Y$ where $X, Y \in V$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Preorders
- $P$: category
- $P$ has at most 1 arrow $p \rightarrow p^{\prime}$ for any given $p, p^{\prime} \in P$,

We define a binary operation $\le$ on $P$

$$
    p \le p^{\prime}
    \Leftrightarrow
    there is an arrow \rightarrow
    .
$$

$P$ is called Preorders.

This binary relation is reflective since there's $\mathrm{id}_{p}$.
And this binary relation is transitive since arrows can be composed.
Preorder is a set of objects equipped with a reflective and transitive binary relation.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark
- $P$: a set with above binary relation

$P$ is a preorder.
Objects are $p \in P$.
Arrows are

$$
    \{
        \langle
            p, p^{\prime}
        \rangle
        \mid
        p, p^{\prime} \in P,
        \
        p \leq p^{\prime}
    \}
    .
$$

Composition of arrows can be defined by those ordered pair $\langle p, p^{\prime} \rangle$ since $\leq$ is transitive by definition.
Since $\leq$ is reflextive, identity $\langle p, p \rangle$ exsits.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Definition partial order
- $P$ is a preorder order

$P$ is sait to be partial orders if the binary relation $\le$ satisfies

$$
    p \leq p^{\prime},
    \
    p \geq p^{\prime},
    \Rightarrow
    p = p^{\prime}
    .
$$

$P$ is said to be linear orders if $P$ is partial oders and 

$$
    p, p^{\prime} \in C
    \
    p \leq p^{\prime},
    \text{ or }
    p \geq p^{\prime},
    .
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Ordinal numbers
We reagard each number $n$ as the linearly ordered set, that is, $n$ refers to $$\{0, 1, \ldots, n-1\}$$.
$0$ denotes an empty set.
$\omega := \{0, 1, 2, \ldots\}$ is infinite ordinal.

Each ordinal $n$ is linearly oredered. Thus, $n$ is a category.

Categories $\mathbf{1}$, $\mathbf{2}$, $\mathbf{3}$ are preorders.
For example, $\mathbf{3}$ has these arrows: $a \leq b$, $b \leq c$, and $a \leq c$, $a \leq a$, $b \leq b$, $c \leq c$.

$\omega$ is a category.
It has arrows

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & &
        0 \rightarrow 1 \rightarrow 2 \rightarrow 3 \cdots,
    \nonumber
    \\
    & &
        n \rightarrow n,
        \
        n \in \omega,
    \nonumber
    \\
        n \rightarrow m
        \
        n, m \in \omega,
        \
        n \leq m
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

The last arrwos are composite of the first ones.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example simplical category
$\Delta$ is the category.
Objects are all finite ordinals.
Arrows $f: m \rightarrow n$ are all order-preserving fuctions.

This category $\Delta$ called simplical category.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example simplical category
$\mathbf{Finoard} := \mathbf{Set}_{\omega}$ is a category.

Objects are all finite ordinals $n$.
Arrows $f: m \rightarrow n$ are all fuctions from $m$ to $n$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Example Large Category
Metacategory of all sets are not a set.
We shall assume that there's a big enough set $U$, the universe.
A set $x$ is said to be small if it is a member of the universe.

$\mathbf{Set}$ is a category whose objects are all small sets.
Arrows are all functions $f: x \rightarrow y$ where $x, y \in U$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

* $\mathbf{Set}$
    * obejcts are all small sets
    * arrows are all functions between them
* $\mathbf{Set}_{*}$
    * Pionted sets
    * Objects are small sets each with a selected base point
    * arrows are base-point-preserving functions
* $\mathbf{Ens}$
    * Category of all sets 
    * Objects are all stes
    * arrows are functions within a set $V$,
* $\mathbf{Cat}$
    * Objects are all small category
    * arrows are all functors
* $\mathbf{Mon}$
    * Objects are all small monoids
    * arrows are all morphism of monoids
* $\mathbf{Grp}$
    * Objects are all small groups
    * arrows are all morphism of groups
* $\mathbf{Ab}$
    * Objects are all small additive abelian group
    * arrows are all morphism of additive abelian group
* $\mathbf{Rng}$
    * Objects are all small rings
    * arrows are all ring morphism preserving unit
* $\mathbf{CRng}$
    * Objects are all small commutative rings
    * arrows are all morphism of commutative rings
* $R-\mathbf{Mod}$
    * Objects are all small left modules over ring $R$,
    * arrows are all morphism of left modules over ring $R$,
* $\mathbf{Mod}-R$
    * Objects are all small right modules over ring $R$,
    * arrows are all morphism of right modules over ring $R$,
* $K-\mathbf{Mod}$
    * Objects are all small modules over commutative ring $K$,
    * arrows are all morphism of modules over commutative ring $K$,
* $\mathbf{Top}$
    * Objects are all small topological space,
    * arrows are all continuous map
* $\mathbf{Toph}$
    * Objects are all small topological space,
    * arrows are all homotopy class of maps
* $\mathbf{Top}_{*}$
    * Objects are all spaces with selected base point
    * arrows are all base-point-preseving map

