---
title: Chapter02-04. Functor Categories
book_title: Categories for the working mathematician
book_chapter: 02
book_section: 04
---

## 02-04. Functor categories


#### Definition

$$
    \mathrm{Funct}(C, B)
    :=
    B^{C}
    .
$$

Objects are all functors from $C$ to $B$.
Arros are all natural transformation from functors.
Let $S, T$ be functors.

$$
    \mathrm{Nat}(S, T)
    :=
    B^{C}(S, T)
    :=
    \{
        \tau
        \mid
        \tau
        \text{ is natural transformation }
    \}
    .
$$

Natural transofrmation is a map $\tau: B_{\text{obj}} \times C_{\mathrm{text}} \rightarrow B_{\mathrm{obj}}$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>


#### Remark
- $B, C$,
    - set

Now we consider $B, C$ as categories.
The objects are its elemeents and arrows are defined below.

$$
    B_{\mathbf{arrow}}
    =
    \{
        f
        \mid
        f:\{b\} \rightarrow \{b\}
        b \in B
    \}
    .
$$

$$
    C_{\mathbf{arrow}}
    =
    \{
        f
        \mid
        f:\{c\} \rightarrow \{c\}
        c \in C
    \}
    .
$$

An object $F$ of Functor category $B^{C}$ is

$$
    F_{\mathrm{obj}}: C \rightarrow B,
    \
    F_{\mathrm{arrow}}: C_{\mathbf{arrow}} \rightarrow B_{\mathbf{arrow}}.
$$

However, all arrows are identity.
We can identify $C_{\mathrm{arrow}} = C$.
So The functor category is indeed a set of function from $C$ to $B$.
In general, if we take a set $C$ as a category, a functor is an arrow on $B$ indexed with $C$.

In this case, there is no natural transformation from any set of functors $S$ and $T$.
A natural transofmraiton $\tau$ of functors $S$ and $T$ is an arrow on $B$ indexed with $C$ where

$$
    \tau_{c}: S(c) \rightarrow T(c)
    .
$$

However, $B$ doesn't have such arrow as we defined above.
If we extend the definition of the arrow set of $B$ to include such maps, a natural transformation is

$$
    \tau_{c} \in \bar{B}_{\mathrm{arrow}}
    .
$$

Hence

$$
    \tau: C \rightarrow B \rightarrow B.
$$

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

#### Remark
- $K$,
    - commutative ring
- $G$,
    - group

The functor catgory

$$
    (K\mathbf{-Mod})^{G}
$$

is the category of ($K$-linear) representations of $G$ where we use $G$ as a category.
$T: G \times V \rightarrow V$ is said to be a representation of $G$ if

- $T_{g}$ is a linear transformation on linear space $V$,
- $T_{gh} = T_{g} T_{h}$,

Here a functor $T: G \rightarrow K\mathbf{-Mod}$ is a map from $G$ to 

$$
    T_{\mathrm{obj}}(g) =: V \in (K\mathbf{-Mod})_{\mathrm{obj}}
$$

and 

$$
    g \in G,
    \
    T_{\mathrm{arrow}}(g): V \rightarrow V
    .
$$

Since $$T_{\mathrm{arrow}}(g) \in K\mathbf{-Mod}$$, $\bar{f}$ is a homomorphism on $V$.
Hence $T_{\mathrm{arrow}}(g)$ is an automorphism.
An object of $$(K\mathbf{-Mod})^{G}$$ is determined by $T_{\mathrm{arrow}}(g)$ and $V$.

Let $T^{\prime}$ be another functor.
A natural transformation $\sigma$ of functors $T, T^{\prime}$ is 

$$
    \sigma_{g} \in (K\mathbf{-Mod})_{\mathrm{arrow}}
    .
$$

Specifically,

$$
    \sigma_{g}: V \rightarrow V^{\prime}
$$

where $V^{\prime} := T^{\prime}_{\mathrm{arrow}}(g)$.
In representaiton theory, $\sigma$ is called an intertwining operator (equivalent map).

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>


#### Remark
When the category $C$ is large, the functor category $B^{C}$ need not to be a subset of the universe.
For example,

- $B := \{0, 1\}$
    - set with two elements
- $C = U$,
    - the universe set,

A functor from $U$ to $B$ is just a function on $U$ to a set with two elements.
The functor category is $$\mathcal{P}(U) = \{0, 1\}^{U}$$.
The cardinality of the functor category is greather than $U$.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

