---
title: Chapter03-02. The Yoneda Lemma
book_title: Categories for the working mathematician
book_chapter: 03
book_section: 02
---

## 03-02. The Yoneda Lemma



#### Proposition 1
- $D, C$,
    - categories
- $S:D \rightarrow C$,
    - functor
- $r \in D$,
- $u: c \rightarrow Sr \in C_{\mathrm{arrow}}$,


$\langle r, u\rangle$ is universal arrow from $c$ to $S$ if and only if the funciton

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & & 
        F_{d}: D(r, d) \rightarrow C(c, Sd),
    \nonumber
    \\
    f^{\prime}: r \rightarrow d \in D(r, d),
    & &
        \
        F_{d}(f^{\prime})
        :=
        Sf^{\prime} \circ u: c \rightarrow Sd
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

is a bijection of hom-sets

$$
\begin{equation}
    D(r, d)
    \cong
    C(c, Sd)
    \label{chap_03_02_equiation_01}
\end{equation}
    .
$$

This bijection is natural in $d$.

Conversely, let $r \in D$, $c \in C$.
Any natural isomorhism $$\eqref{chap_03_02_equiation_01}$$ is determiend in this way by a unique arrow $u: c \rightarrow Sr$ such that $\langle r, u\rangle$ is universal from $c$ to $S$.

#### proof

$(\Rightarrow)$

$F$ is injection.
Indeed, let $F(f^{\prime}) = F(f^{\prime\prime})$.
We assume that $f^{\prime} \neq f^{\prime}$.
By the property of the unique arrow, $F(f^{\prime})$ is unique.
Thus, $F(f^{\prime}) \neq F(f^{\prime\prime})$.

$F$ is surjection.
Let $f: c \rightarrow Sd$.
By definition of the universal arrow,

$$
    \exists^{!} f^{\prime}: r \rightarrow d,
    \
    Sf^{\prime} \circ u
    =
    f
    .
$$

$(\Leftarrow)$

Let $d \in D$, $f: c \rightarrow Sd$.
Define $f^{\prime} := F^{-1}(f)$.
By definition,

$$
    Sf^{\prime} \circ u
    = F(f^{\prime})
    = f
$$

Let $f^{\prime\prime} \in D_{\mathrm{arrow}}$ be another arrow such that $S f^{\prime\prime} \circ u = f$.

$$
    f^{\prime\prime}
    = F^{-1}(F(f^{\prime\prime}))
    = F^{-1}(f)
    = f^{\prime}
    .
$$

($F$ is natural in $d$)

We define two functors.
$T_{r}: D \rightarrow \mathrm{Set}$.
The objective function is $T_{r}(d) := \mathrm{Hom}(r, d)$.
The arrow function is

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & &
        g^{\prime}: d \rightarrow d^{\prime},
        \
        T_{r}(g^{\prime}): D(r, d) \rightarrow D(r, d^{\prime})
    \nonumber
    \\
    & &
        f^{\prime} \in \mathrm{Hom}_{D}(r, d),
        \
        T_{r}(g^{\prime})(f^{\prime}) := g^{\prime} \circ f^{\prime}
    \nonumber
    .
\end{eqnarray}
$$

We deifne $U_{c}: C \rightarrow \mathrm{Set}$.
The objective function is $U_{c}(d) := \mathrm{Hom}(c, Sd)$.
The arrow function is

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & &
        g^{\prime}: d \rightarrow d^{\prime},
        \
        U_{c}(g^{\prime}): C(c, Sd) \rightarrow C(c, S d^{\prime})
    \nonumber
    \\
    & &
        f \in \mathrm{Hom}_{C}(c, Sd),
        \
        U_{c}(g^{\prime})(f) := S g^{\prime} \circ f
    .
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

$F_{\cdot}: T_{r} \rightarrow U_{c}$ is natural transformation.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & &
        F_{d}: \mathrm{Hom}_{D}(r, d) \rightarrow \mathrm{Hom}_{C}(c, Sd)
    \nonumber
    \\
    g^{\prime}: d \rightarrow d^{\prime},
    & &
        F_{d}(g^{\prime}) = S g^{\prime} \circ u
    .
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

$$
\begin{CD}
    d \in C
    \\
    @V{g^{\prime}}VV
    \\
    d^{\prime} \in D
\end{CD}
\quad
\begin{CD}
    D(r, d) @>{F_{d}}>> C(c, Sd)
    \\
    @V{T_{r}(g^{\prime})}VV    @V{U_{c}(g^{\prime})}VV
    \\
    D(r, d^{\prime}) @>{F_{d^{\prime}}}>>  C(c, Sd^{\prime})
\end{CD}
$$

This is commutative.
Indeed,

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    f^{\prime}: r \rightarrow d,
    \
    (F_{d^{\prime}} \circ T_{r}(g^{\prime})) (f^{\prime})
    & = &
        S(g^{\prime} \circ f^{\prime}) \circ u
    \nonumber
    \\
    & = &
        S(g^{\prime}) \circ S(f^{\prime}) \circ u
    \nonumber
    \\
    & = &
        U_{c}(F_{d}(f^{\prime}))
    \nonumber
    \\
    & = &
        (U_{c} \circ F_{d})(f^{\prime})
    .
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

(conversely)

Conversely, we assume that there is a natural isomorphism $$\eqref{chap_03_02_equiation_01}$$.
That is, for all $d \in D$, $\phi_{d}: D(r, d) \rightarrow C(c, Sd)$ is isomorhism in $\mathrm{Set}$.

Choose $d$ as $r$.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    1_{r} \in D(r, r),
    \
    u
    & := &
        \phi_{r}(1_{r}): c \rightarrow Sr
    .
\end{eqnarray}
$$

$$
\begin{CD}
    r
    \\
    @V{g^{\prime}}VV
    \\
    d
\end{CD}
\qquad
\begin{CD}
    D(r, r) @>{\phi_{r}}>> C(c, Sr)
    \\
    @V{D(r, \cdot)(f^{\prime})}VV    @V{C(c, S\cdot)(f^{\prime})}VV
    \\
    D(r, d) @>{\phi_{d}}>>  C(c, Sd)
\end{CD}
$$

is commutative.

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & &
        C(c, S\cdot)(f^{\prime}) \circ \phi_{r}(1_{r})
        =
        \phi_{d} \circ D(r, \cdot)(f^{\prime})(1_{r})
    \nonumber
    \\
    & \Leftrightarrow &
        C(c, S\cdot)(f^{\prime}) \circ u
        =
        \phi_{d} \circ f^{\prime}
    \nonumber
    \\
    & \Leftrightarrow &
        (Sf^{\prime}) \circ u
        =
        \phi_{d}(f^{\prime})
    .
\end{eqnarray}
$$

Since $\phi_{d}$ is a surjection, the RHS covers all function $f: c \rightarrow Sd$.
The uniquness follows from the fact that $\phi_{d}$ is injective.


<div class="QED" style="text-align: right">$\Box$</div>


#### Definition
- $D$
    - a category which has small hom-sets.
- $K: D \rightarrow \mathrm{Set}$,
    - functor
- $r \in D$,
- $\phi: D(r, \cdot) \rightarrow K$,

A representaiton of a functor $K$ is a pair $\langle r, \phi \rangle$ when $\phi$ is a natural isomorhism.

$r$ is called the representing object.

The functor $K$ is said to be representable whne such a representation exists.

<div class="end-of-statement" style="text-align: right">■</div>

Up to isomorphism, a representable functor is just a covariant hom-functor $D(r, \cdot)$.


#### Proposition 2
- $*$
    - any one-point set
- $D$,
    - a category whose hom-sets are small sets
- $r \in D$,
- $K: D \rightarrow \mathrm{Set}$,
    - functor
- $u: * \rightarrow Kr$,

If $\langle r, u\rangle$ is a universal arrow from $*$ to $K: D \rightarrow \mathrm{Set}$, then

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    d \in D,
    & &
        \phi_{d}: D(r, d) \rightarrow \mathrm{Set},
    \nonumber
    \\
    f^{\prime}: r \rightarrow d,
    & &
        \phi_{d}(f)
        :=
        K(f^{\prime})(u*)
        \in
        Kd
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

$\langle r, \phi, \rangle$ is a representaion of $K$.

Every representaiton of $K$ is obtained in this way from exactly one such universal arrow.

#### proof
Let $X$ be a set and $f: * \rightarrow X$.

$$
\begin{CD}
    r
    \\
    @V{g^{\prime}}VV
    \\
    X
\end{CD}
\quad
\begin{CD}
    * @>{\cong}>> *
    \\
    @V{f}VV    @V{u}VV
    \\
    X @>{F_{d^{\prime}}}>> Kr
\end{CD}
$$

$f$ is determiend by $f(*) \in X$.
Hence a map

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    & &
        \psi_{X}: \mathrm{Set}(*, X) \rightarrow X,
    \nonumber
    \\
    & &
        \psi_{X}(f) := f(*)
    \nonumber
\end{eqnarray}
$$

is a bijection and $\mathrm{Set}(*, \cdot) \xrightarrow{\cdot} \mathrm{Id}$ is natural as follows.

$$
\begin{CD}
    X
    \\
    @V{g}VV
    \\
    X^{\prime}
\end{CD}
\qquad
\begin{CD}
    \mathrm{Set}(*, \cdot)(X) @>{\psi_{X}}>> X
    \\
    @V{\mathrm{Set}(*, \cdot)(X^{\prime})(g)}VV    @V{\mathrm{Id}}VV
    \\
    \mathrm{Set}(*, \cdot)(X^{\prime})  @>{\psi_{X^{\prime}}}>> X^{\prime}
\end{CD}
$$

Thus, composing $K$ yields

$$
\begin{CD}
    KX
    \\
    @V{g}VV
    \\
    KX^{\prime}
\end{CD}
\qquad
\begin{CD}
    \mathrm{Set}(*, K\cdot)(X) @>{\psi_{KX}}>> KX
    \\
    @V{\mathrm{Set}(*, \cdot)(X^{\prime})(g)}VV    @V{Kg}VV
    \\
    \mathrm{Set}(*, K\cdot)(X^{\prime})  @>{\psi_{X^{\prime}}}>> KX^{\prime}
\end{CD}
$$

That is, $\phi: \mathrm{Set}(*, K\cdot) \xrightarrow{\cdot} K$ is natural transformation.
Particularly, $\phi_{X}$ is isomorphic.

$$
    \mathrm{Set}(*, K\cdot) \cong K\cdot
    .
$$

Now we will show $\mathrm{Set}(*, K\cdot) \cdot \cong D(r, \cdot)$.

Applying the proposition 1 taking $C = \mathrm{Set}$, $c = *$, $S = K$,

$$
\begin{eqnarray}
    f^{\prime}: r \rightarrow d,
    \
    \phi_{d}(f^{\prime}) := K f^{\prime} \circ u: * \rightarrow Kd
\end{eqnarray}
$$

is a bijectoin of hom-sets

$$
    D(r, d) \cong \mathrm{Set}(*, Kd)
    .
$$

Combining the results,

$$
    D(r, \cdot) \cong \mathrm{Set}(*, K\cdot) \cong K\cdot
    .
$$

(Conversely)

Let $\langle r, \phi\rangle$ is a representation of $K$.


<div class="QED" style="text-align: right">$\Box$</div>

#### Definition
- $C$
    - category whose hom sets are small sets - $d \in C$,

$C(d, \cdot): C \rightarrow \mathrm{Set}$ is a functor.
The object function is $C(d, c)$ and
The arrow function is 

$$
    f: c \rightarrow c^{\prime},
    \
    g: d \rightarrow c,
    \
    C(d, \cdot): C(d, c) \rightarrow C(d, c^{\prime}),
    C(d, \cdot)(f)(g) :=  f \circ g
    .
$$
